We're moving on to the sizzle
part of this particular workshop,
which are some of these
new pseudo classes.
And if you are following anyone who talks
about CSS on Twitter or other locations,
you will find that they're talking about
these new pseudo classes called is, where,
not, and has.
Not has been around for a while.
Is, where, and has are brand new ones.
And so I wanted to take some
time to put some focus on these
because they are mind blowingly
helpful and interesting and
different as you write your HTML and CSS.
All right, so this is our Iceland website
again, and Iceland was very kind.
If you go to their government website,
they will tell you what exactly those
hex codes for their flag colors.
So that is of course what I have used
here on the Web page, are those, and
I've set those up at the top
here as some variables.
And as you'll recall here on the page,
just a couple of things to point out.
We had this aside here in the middle and
people were talking
about that as a sidebar.
Generally speaking,
we think of that as vertically-oriented.
Just to be different for you,
I have made it horizontally-oriented right
here in the middle of the page, just to
show you that a sidebar doesn't have to
actually be a vertical thing on the page.
You could do something like that instead,
okay.
So this is mostly a styled page
that we have going on here, but
there's some things that maybe
we would want to improve.
So for example,
I've added a section here to this Web page
that talks about the animals of Iceland,
because I know you're just dying
to know what animals live there.
It is a long list of animals
that live there in Iceland.
But we certainly have a gaping
bunch of the page over here, right?
But then these lists get kinda long,
we have a lot of space.
What are we going to do about that?
That is one problem we might
wanna think about solving.
We also might wanna think about
how I separated out one footer
from the other footer
down here at the bottom.
You could do that with classes, but I did
that in a different way just to show you.
Okay, so we have down here, we have a
footer, that's sort of the generic footer
styling that would apply to
both kinds of footers, right?
If I were to say,
start a comment right here,
both of my footers would look
the same way on this page like that.
But because I separated these,
with the article footer coming second,
then I could apply a different
kind of styling here for that.
So that's what's going on for that.
All right, so there's nothing new in that
CSS if you wanna read through it and
see how I styled everything.
You're gonna see a whole bunch
of stuff that I've done before.
But now what I wanna do is I wanna go back
and refactor some of the code that I have
here to make this a little
bit more efficient, okay?
So we're gonna scroll back up here
in our CSS, Up here to the top.
So here's something that is fairly
typical that you'll find inside of
pretty much any kinda CSS
that's out there right now.
Here on line 31,
I have a long list of article h1,
article h2, article h3, article h4.
Because I want all of these article
headings to be styled in a specific way,
in this case, with a PT Serif font family.
This is the way we've done it for
20 years,
we've just made a huge,
long list of these kinda things.
And inevitably,
somebody makes the mistake of this.
They'll do article h2,
then, h3, h4, h5, right,
and think that that actually
means the same thing.
It doesn't.
Okay, so that particular selector that
I just put there says for h2s located
in an article and all h3s and all h4s,
right, for everywhere in the document.
So you have to be verbose like this and
you have to repeat yourself over and
over again.
One of the brand new selectors is targeted
to making this a little bit easier to deal
with, and it is for that reason that this
is just amazing to have this selector.
So there are two of these.
One of these is called is and
the other one is called where.
And the difference has to do
with specificity for these.
So where is less specific and
is is more specific.
And I'm gonna leave it vague like that for
now until we get to the specificity
part of this course later on, okay.
So one way that you can rewrite these,
the syntax is gonna be the same for
either one of these,
but the way you could rewrite
this would be as follows,
article :is, we could say h2,
h3, h4, h5, h6.
Then we want,
Then we're gonna wanna have the PT Serif
font family displaying here.
And just to show you that this worked,
we could add to it a color, Fire-red.
So that will select all of those
headings there on the page.
In other words, we don't have to write
article h1, article h2, article h3 and
all the commas separated,
we can now do it this way.
So article is the thing that's in common,
these are what come after that.
Does that kind of makes sense,
how that fits together?
And you can change this from is to where,
that will also,
in this environment,
it will work as well, I believe.
You'll see absolutely
no change whatsoever.
The specificity of the where
selector is lower.
And I'm gonna talk all about specificity
in lots of detail most likely later on.
Okay, so later on here,
we have an aside h3, all right?
So basically, right now, for all of my
headings I want them to be PT Serif,
but for my h3, I want it to be Fira Sans.
And I've got the my aside h3 with a whole
bunch of other styling that goes with it,
it comes later in the document,
and it works fine.
But I could combine this
particular issue here,
this font family Sans Serif,
with the selector that I just wrote.
But another way that I could
do this is simply to say,
all of those h3s except for,
right, just not this type of h3.
In this case, it's an h3 inside an aside.
So we could rewrite that,
I'm just gonna remove that style here,
you'll see it reverts to PT Serif.
Let's go back to my is style up here.
So here, what I'm going to do this,
is h3:not, Aside h3.
Sweet?
So now for all h3s, make it PT Sans,
but not the aside h3.
The aside h3 is not gonna get this style.
So it is just gonna continue
on being Fari Sans.
Makes sense?
So we're getting very efficient with our
selectors, right, kind of refactoring.
And it may be that the easiest way for you
to work with these is to write your CSS
first and then refactor,
do these little mini refactors,
just like what we're doing here to
make this a little bit more efficient.
By the way, of course, you'll wanna
check with browser support for
whatever browsers it is that you're using.
These are kind of cutting bleeding edge,
the last few versions of browsers
support these at the moment.
Okay, and then we have my last favorite
trick here which has to do with hats.
And this just blew my
mind when I saw this one.
All right, so we're gonna deal
with this list of animals here.
Now, it would be really nice to be able to
take these bullets that I have here and
maybe make some columns out of them.
Wouldn't that be great?
And we could write flexbox to do this,
or we could write columns to do that.
But it would be even better if
we could make this conditional.
So in other words, if Iceland suddenly
gains a whole bunch of animals.
[LAUGH] A whole bunch of new animals move
to Iceland and this list gets longer, or
a bunch of animals die off and this list
gets shorter, we will be able to handle
that inside of some kind of conditional
code that we'll format accordingly.
And so the way that we can do
this is with the has selector.
So has is this wild and
crazy one that selects completely
differently than everybody else.
So as I have told you
now a couple of times,
we write our selectors left to right,
but we read them from right to left.
We go from deep in our
HTML going outwards.
Has goes the other direction.
It's gonna start from the parents and
work down to the children.
It looks for patterns on the parents and
then applies,
if that pattern in parentage works,
or ancestry,
I should be more specific,
if that pattern of ancestry works,
then it will apply styles
to the specific children.
And so the crazy thing that we can do with
this has to do with that list layout.
So I'm just gonna add this down here
to the bottom after everything else.
What we can do is this.
So it's an unordered list, right, ul:has.
And what I'm gonna say is,
for my li:nth-child(6).
In other words, we're testing to see if we
have at least six children in this list.
Because we just tested to see
if the sixth one is there.
If there are 6, let's make columns 2.
Whoa, [SOUND] sizzle, sizzle, right?
So now it's smart enough to know that I
have at least six things in that list.
Why six?
I don't know.
I just decided that was a good spot.
And it's smart enough here, by the way,
to make those relatively even.
I think there are 15 of these.
So one column has eight and
the other column has seven, right?
So we can apply even further styling.
We just put it a little
further down the page.
So ul:has(li:nth-child),
let's say the 11 of them.
So if there's 11 of them,
that may still look a little bit long.
Then we can say, columns: 3, waah.
So it's smart enough to know that in my
15-item list, I do have an 11th child.
So now we're going to set it
up with three columns instead.
And it doesn't apply to the seabirds
where there were only three of those.
So it doesn't fit either of those tests.
It doesn't fit that there are 6 items,
doesn't fit that there are 11 items, yes.
Yes, Mark says has, is, and
where are difficult to search for
on search engines.
You're absolutely correct on that.
That is because they
are brand spanking new.
I would just suggest that you go do
a search for MDN CSS has, MDN CSS where,
those will pull up the pages with
information about where, is, and has.
Yeah, and
they were very happy in the chat.
So there's that.
Okay, so this is a really cool use of has.
We can apply conditional formatting.
It's not a media query,
it's not anything like that,
we're just testing to see how
many things are in a list.
And if there are enough of them,
we'll just put some columns in place.